.\" PartFS - partfs-progs
.\" man/mkfs.part.8
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 AnmiTaliDev <anmitalidev@nuros.org>
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-only
.\"
.TH MKFS.PART 8 "2026" "partfs-progs 0.1.0" "System Administration"
.\"
.SH NAME
mkfs.part \- create a PartFS filesystem
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mkfs.part
.RB [ \-L
.IR label ]
.RB [ \-j
.IR journal_blocks ]
.I device
.br
.B mkfs.part
.B \-\-version
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mkfs.part
initialises a
.B PartFS
filesystem on
.IR device ,
which may be a block device (e.g.\&
.IR /dev/sdb )
or a regular file containing a disk image.
.PP
PartFS is a 64-bit, little-endian, extent-based filesystem with CRC32C
checksums on all metadata blocks, a write-ahead journal for crash recovery,
and an FNV-1a\-keyed B-tree directory index.
It carries no Microsoft LFN patents and is designed as a modern replacement
for FAT32/vFAT.
.PP
The following on-disk structures are written by
.BR mkfs.part :
.TP
.B Superblock (LBA 0) + backup (LBA 1)
Volume metadata: magic, version, UUID, label, block count, journal location,
and CRC32C over the first 124 bytes.
.TP
.B Journal header (LBA 2) + mirror (LBA 3)
Write-ahead journal state set to
.IR clean .
Both copies are identical except for their self-referencing
.I block_no
field.
.TP
.B Journal data area (LBA 4 \[en] LBA 4+N\-1)
.I N
zero-filled blocks, where
.I N
is the journal size in blocks.
Zeroed quickly using
.BR fallocate (2)
with
.B FALLOC_FL_ZERO_RANGE
when the target is a regular file; falls back to explicit writes otherwise.
.TP
.B Block groups
Each group covers up to 32768 blocks (~128\ MiB).
Group 0 starts at LBA\ 4+N and contains:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Group descriptor (1 block)
.IP \(bu 2
Allocation bitmap (4 blocks, marks 7 blocks as used)
.IP \(bu 2
Inode B-tree leaf with root inode #1
.IP \(bu 2
Root directory data block (B-tree leaf with
.B .
and
.B ..
entries)
.RE
.RS
.PP
Groups 1+ contain only a group descriptor and allocation bitmap (5 blocks
marked as used).
.RE
.\"
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-L " label"
Set the volume label.
.I label
is a UTF-8 string of up to 32 bytes.
If omitted, the label field is left blank (all zeros).
.TP
.BI \-j " journal_blocks"
Set the journal size in blocks.
Each block is 4096\ bytes.
.I journal_blocks
must be a positive integer no greater than 4294967295.
.br
Default:
.B 1024
(4\ MiB).
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the program version and exit.
.\"
.SH "MINIMUM DEVICE SIZE"
The device must hold at least
.IP
.I journal_blocks
+ 11 blocks
.PP
in total.  For the default journal of 1024 blocks this is
.B 1035 blocks (approximately 4\ MiB).
.PP
The layout is:
.PP
.TS
l l.
LBA 0	Primary superblock
LBA 1	Backup superblock
LBA 2	Journal header (primary)
LBA 3	Journal header (mirror)
LBA 4 \[en] 4+N\-1	Journal data (\fIN\fP blocks)
LBA 4+N \[en] end	Block groups
.TE
.\"
.SH "ON-DISK FORMAT"
All multi-byte integers are stored in
.B little-endian
byte order.
.PP
Every metadata block begins with a
.B partfs_block_hdr
(16\ bytes):
.PP
.TS
l l l.
Offset	Size	Field
_
0	4	magic
4	4	CRC32C (field zeroed during computation)
8	8	block_no (self-referencing LBA)
.TE
.PP
Directory entries use FNV-1a 64-bit hashing (offset basis 14695981039346656037,
prime 1099511628211).
Extent descriptors encode physical block addresses in 48-bit little-endian
format (6\ bytes).
.PP
For the complete on-disk format specification see
.IR driver/partfs-fuse/docs/on-disk-format.md .
.\"
.SH "UUID GENERATION"
.B mkfs.part
reads 16 random bytes from
.I /dev/urandom
and applies the RFC\ 4122 version\ 4, variant\ 1 bit masks:
.IP
.nf
uuid[6] = (uuid[6] & 0x0F) | 0x40
uuid[8] = (uuid[8] & 0x3F) | 0x80
.fi
.\"
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.TP
.B 0
The filesystem was created successfully.
.TP
.B 1
An error occurred (invalid arguments, device too small, I/O failure, etc.).
Error details are printed to standard error.
.\"
.SH EXAMPLES
Format a block device with a label:
.PP
.RS
.EX
mkfs.part \-L "data" /dev/sdb
.EE
.RE
.PP
Create and format a 256\ MiB image file with the default journal:
.PP
.RS
.EX
truncate \-s 256M disk.img
mkfs.part \-L "test" disk.img
.EE
.RE
.PP
Format with a smaller 256-block (1\ MiB) journal:
.PP
.RS
.EX
mkfs.part \-j 256 /dev/mmcblk0
.EE
.RE
.\"
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /dev/urandom
Source of randomness for UUID generation.
.\"
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR mkfs (8),
.BR mkfs.ext4 (8),
.BR mkfs.fat (8),
.BR fallocate (2),
.BR fsync (2)
.\"
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at
.UR https://github.com/AnmiTaliDev/partfs\-fuse
.UE .
.\"
.SH AUTHOR
AnmiTaliDev <anmitalidev@nuros.org>
.\"
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 AnmiTaliDev.
Licensed under the MIT License.
